Hi there! Welcome to
this video. Today we
will learn what
private data is.
Private data is
information about you
that needs special
protection. When you
understand private
data, you can make
safer choices online.
The goal of this
video is to help you
tell the difference
between private data
and public data. We
will look at examples
, explain why
attackers and
companies want data,
and practice a simple
rule you can use
before you share
anything online.
When you use apps,
games or websites,
you often share
information,
sometimes without
noticing. Some
information is safe
to share, like your
favourite colour.
Other information
should stay private,
because it can
identify you or help
someone reach you.
Private data is
information about you
that should only be
seen by you, your
family or trusted
adults. Private data
can help someone
figure out who you
are or where you are.
That is why private
data needs extra care
. Here are common
examples of private
data. Your full name,
your home address,
your phone number,
your email address,
your school name, and
your passwords. Even
one of these details
can be important, and
several together can
be very risky. Public
data is information
that is usually okay
for most people to
know. For example,
your favourite sport,
your favourite food,
or your favourite
movie. Public data is
still yours, but it
normally does not
help someone find or
identify you.
Sometimes the same
information can be
safe in one situation
and risky in another.
For example, a pet's
name might seem
harmless, but it can
be risky if someone
uses it to guess a
password or security
question. A big
privacy problem is
oversharing.
Oversharing means
sharing too much, too
often, or with too
many people. Even
small details can
become risky when
they are combined,
like your name plus
your school plus your
location.
Companies may collect
data to understand
what you like and to
show you adverts or
suggestions. They
might track what you
click, what you watch
, and what you search
for. This is one
reason privacy that
privacy settings and
careful sharing are
important.
Attackers may want
private data for
harmful reasons. They
might try to create
fake accounts,
pretend to be you, or
trick you later with
messages. That is why
passwords and contact
details should never
be shared with
strangers.
Here is a simple rule
you can use. Stop and
think before you
share. Ask yourself,
who will see this?
Why do they want it?
And what could go
wrong if the wrong
person gets this
information? If you
are unsure, the
safest choice is to
ask a trusted adult.
Trusted adults can
help you decide what
is private and what
is public. Asking for
help is not a
weakness. It is a
smart privacy skill.
Let's recap. Private
data is information
that can identify you
or help someone reach
you. Public data data
is usually safe, like
favourite things. And
context matters.
Think carefully
before sharing,
especially in games,
apps and messages. In
class, you will
practice this with a
sorting activity. You
will decide if
examples belong in
the private column or
the public column.
Remember, when in
doubt, treat it as
private and ask a
trusted adult. What
is private data?
Great work. In this
video, you learned
what private data is
and why it needs
protection. Next,
watch the video about
digital footprints to
learn what happens to
data after it is
shared online. Thank
you for watching.